# p5.speech: An introduction {

---

## Summary

[p5.speech]() is a library that provides simplified access to the [Web Audio Speech Synthesis](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/SpeechSynthesis) and [Speech Recognition](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/SpeechRecognition) components of the browser. That is, it lets us make our computer *talk to us* and also *listen to what we say*!

---

## Contents

- Meeting a new library
- The p5.speech website
- Looking at examples
- Reading the documentation
- What next?

---

## Meeting a new library

Whenever we want to use a library, we always want to start by trying to *understand it* a bit first before we jump in and try to use it. Generally speaking, there are three key steps to start out with:

1. Go to the website for an overview
2. Look at any examples provided
3. Read or at least scan the documentation

---

## The p5.speech website

The p5.speech website lives at

[https://idmnyu.github.io/p5.js-speech/](https://idmnyu.github.io/p5.js-speech/)

Because it's a fairly simple library, it's a fairly simple website. We get a basic description up top, a couple of ways to obtain the library, some examples, and some documentation. All just as we might hope.

At heart, p5.speech is a way to use your browser's speech output and input features a little more easily.

---

## Looking at examples

The p5.speech website provides a series of fairly basic examples. This way we can both *experience what it's capable of* and *see the code to achieve this* in one place.

When looking at an example, it's usually best to first run the example, then take a look at the code afterwards. There's no need to assume you'll understand every line of it, but it's a good idea to just get a sense of what the common elements are, the patterns involved.

---

## Reading the documentation

---

## What next?

---

}
